# 01.1 Getting your sequencing data on Quest
This document will go over how to get sequencing data on Quest.

Objectives:
- Identify methods to move sequencing data on to Quest
- Use Illumina Basespace CLI to transfer sequencing files to Quest

## How do I get my own sequences on to Quest?
There are a few methods to get the sequencing fastq files from a sequencing center to your allocation on Quest. This will largely depend on how the sequencing center shares files with you. For example, Rush Microbiome Sequencing Center will give you access to the data through Illumnina Basespace, while SeqCenter sends you data through Dropbox. 

Depending on what sequencing center you used, you may have some different options to get your data on Quest. In general, you can either manually download files then transfer to Quest using a program like WinSCP or FileZilla OR transfer them directly from the hosting service to Quest using some kind of command line interface (CLI). I would recommend you find a way to transfer them directly to Quest, it will take some time investment to figure out but will end up saving you a lot of time in the long run! 


## Transferring data from BaseSpace to Quest
If your data is available through Illumina BaseSpace, you are in luck, because getting the data to Quest is *relatively* straightforward. Here are some instructions to get you started, and you can visit [the BaseSpace CLI page](https://developer.basespace.illumina.com/docs/content/documentation/cli/cli-overview) to learn more. Remember that Quest uses a Linux-based operating system, so follow instructions for Linux. 

Thank to Hannah for workshopping and writing up these instructions!

Connect to Quest in a command line window  
`ssh has6002@quest.northwestern.edu`
First, create the folders “programs” and a subfolder named “basespace”  
    `cd /home/has6002/programs/basespace`  
Change the file path to the basespace folder and then run the following command:  
    `wget "https://launch.basespace.illumina.com/CLI/latest/amd64-linux/bs"`   
    This should generate a file called “bs.”  

Next, run these lines:  

    ```
    ## to enable execute file permissions
    chmod u+x /home/has6002/programs/basespace/bs

    ## authenticate
    /home/has6002/programs/basespace/bs auth 
    ```

    You will then be given a url where you can authenticate your Illumina account.


To download your data, first determine your project number.  

    ```
    # This command will print the project ID number
    /home/has6002/programs/basespace/bs list projects
    Then, enter the following command, changing the number to the project ID.
    # download all fastq.gz
    /home/has6002/programs/basespace/bs download project -i 414789545 \\
    --extension=fastq.gz -o /projects/b1052/hannah/data_dump
    ```

Doing that command made all the files download as folders, since there were forward and reverse reads for each sample. To remove the individual folders and store everything in one parent folder, use a mv with wildcard matching and delete all the sample folders
    ```
    cd /projects/b1052/hannah/data_dump
    mv 2178*/2178-* /projects/b052/hannah/data_dump
    ```
